>> My name is Allan Schaffer, and I'm Apple's
graphics evangelist, and this session is all
about taking an OpenGL application that you've written or
that you have in progress and modernizing it for the things
that we've done with our implementation
of OpenGL and Mac OS X Leopard.
And as I was saying in an earlier session, there's really,
there's sort of three categories that modernizations fit
into when we're thinking of them in presenting to you.
The first category is that we've really added a lot of new
features to our implementation of OpenGL for Leopard.
Things like the multithreaded engine, 64-bit support.
Other things I'm going to get into
later in the, in the presentation.
So that's kind of the first category.
We want you to adopt those features really to
keep up with what's going on on the platform.
The second category is that with OpenGL,
we're tracking an external specification.
You know the OpenGL is defined by the OpenGL ARB
working group, now part of Kronos.
And so as they do their work and you know
refine the specification and add extensions
and so on, we bring those into our implementation.
And so some of this presentation is about that, it's about
things that the ARB is working on that we want you
to adopt to bring your application
to, into the modern times.
The third category is that there's
really a number of best practices.
Either that are specific to the Mac OS X platform
or
things that are just in general now with GPUs,
the best practices that you should be using
for when you're developing using OpenGL.
A lot of this centers around the different buffer objects.
And so we'll be talking about that quite a bit.
So this presentation is actually the first of four
OpenGL talks that we're giving here at WWDC this year.
Along with an OpenGL lab.
So the session later this after, Switching to Mac OS X
OpenGL is intended for those of you who are coming
to Mac OS X and OpenGL from another platform.
Either from Direct 3D to OpenGL or maybe
you're using OpenGL on another operating system
and just want to know how to get started with it on Mac OS X.
Then tomorrow morning we have the GLSL and Tuning session
so that's really for, especially for people who are deeper
into OpenGL already and you have working applications,
you want to know how to kind of take them to the next level.
And then we'll all be in the lab
all afternoon Tuesday until closing.
So for this session what we've got, how I've got this
set up is that I'm going to spend a few minutes just talking
about what is OpenGL and its role in Mac OS X.
This is just some introductory material.
And then after that we're going to talk about 10 ways
that you can modernize your OpenGL-based application.
So let me just kind of go back into the past, you know when,
when OpenGL was first ratified, 1992 with OpenGL 1.0.
You know if you think back to the
applications of the time, you know they were,
they were really defined by the graphics cards of that era.
You know, it was very expensive workstation
class and higher-end graphics pipelines.
And so those were primarily being used by people
doing high-performance scientific visualization,
or also on the other side being used by
people in the entertainment industry.
Now this is a picture on the left
here of a modern application actually.
I just mean it to, to sort of illustrate the market
that was enabled by OpenGL back at that time.
But if you look at these models here, their
sort of, they have a certain look, right?
They are garrow shaded, they
have one point light source.
In this particular case, there's no textures being applied.
Pretty simple models, probably just triangle strips.
And you know not using any, any
real further uses of OpenGL.
But really that's because that's what was the,
you, know the main, the mainline use of OpenGL
on those graphics cards back when it first started.
And then if you jump forward a few years, and think
of the progression of graphics technology and hardware,
what happened is it started to move
down market into the consumer space.
And what the consumers were doing, you know one
thing they really liked doing is to play games.
And so once again, a modern image from a modern app but just
to illustrate, you know games kind of started to come online
and it was being driven by changes in the hardware.
So once the hardware started to support things like
multitexture and you know more complex blending operations
and other things like that, you started to see these
kinds of games, you know, come into the marketplace.
Of course, this is a shot from Doom 3
which is much more recent.
But, just you know, games started to happen.
Then likewise in the, in sort of the higher-end space,
you started to see a move from geotypical terrain
and outdoor scenes to geospecific data, meaning real-world
terrain, real-world textures, being paged off the disk
and moved into the, into the graphics hardware.
And once again this was driven by hardware changes, what
was going on was that the interconnect between the host
and the graphics hardware was getting faster.
And so, it was becoming practical now to
stream textures down to the graphics cards.
And so you were able to do applications like this.
Of course, this is a shot out of Google Earth, a modern
application that, that's the Apple campus right there.
And so, but you know, just to show you as the graphics
hardware advanced, these new markets started to come online.
And likewise, the last example,
texture memory kept increasing.
You know sort of over the years
as texture memory has increased,
volume visualization has become more
and more practicable using OpenGL.
Once again we have a case here, this is the OsiriX
app and you know even with a chat window in the front.
But behind the chat you know you can
see a heart, you can see the skeleton
and veins and things like that and nerve endings.
So you know this sort of volume metric dataset started
to become more applicable for OpenGL applications to go
and implement as the graphics hardware advanced.
So that's sort of like the past in you know
going through three-dimensional graphics.
But so if you think about now, OpenGL in the
present, I actually want to start somewhere else.
OpenGL has become pervasive now beyond 3D graphics and
we're using it in Mac OS X in a lot of places for 2D.
And so you see some examples here.
The Window effects like the genie effect is
the, as you, you know, minimize the window.
Video effects coming in through Core Image, excuse
me, through Core Video and fed into Core Image.
Image effects as well.
So these are things that are now
being driven once again by hardware.
And so like for the image effects, just as an example,
Core Image is implementing those using fragment programs.
And so that's programming the GPU to
do a complex image processing operation
and move that work essentially off the
CPU, move it onto the graphics hardware,
which is a process that's really
geared toward that kind of work.
And we're able to really do some things
you know outside of just this, the,
the sort of expected 3D graphics and image processing space.
Then likewise in Mac OS X, there's a lot of our
frameworks that are using OpenGL under the hood.
And so I mentioned Core Image, so that's how
they're doing their image processing effect.
Core Animation, same story.
So when, when a layer is being animated in Core
Animation, that is actually, you could think of that
like a texture being drawn on a quad in OpenGL.
Core Video, another case where you have, you
know, Core Video is used to sort of tear frames
out of a QuickTime movie and feed it through a pipeline.
Well, the end of that pipeline can be resulting in a,
you know, a Core Video pixel buffer
which is stored down on the GPU.
Core, Quartz Composer likewise is
really an OpenGL-based application.
All of Quartz Composer's rendering
is just doing, using OpenGL.
And I'm going to show you that in a little bit.
And then maybe the last one is kind of interesting now.
Added in Leopard is that Quartz itself
can be accelerated through OpenGL.
This is an opt-in thing that your application can
do but you see some good speed improvements
because you're moving essentially 2D graphics work
onto the GPU, and just you know besides moving it,
you're offloading that work from the CPU, and so the CPU
doesn't have to go and try and fill every pixel anymore.
That's the kind of work that the GPU is really tuned for.
So that's in the 2D space.
Now let's think about the 3D space.
The big change that has happened
here is programmable shading.
And you, I think many of you saw this, this
example during Steve's keynote on Monday.
This is a shot out of id's Tech 5 demo.
Excuse me.
And I guess what this really represents
is sort of that, that extreme leading edge
of where 3D graphics is and where it can be right now.
Using things like programmable shading, using
really all of the power of the graphics card,
you know for as much as the 3D pipeline can do for you.
And so I sort of present this as a,
as a question for, for all of you.
I mean it, I mean it very gently.
But I want to ask, so does your OpenGL
application, well, does it look more like this?
Or more like the dinosaur from before?
So, because if it, if it looks like where
on that spectrum are you, you know?
Dinosaur over here, John Carmack over here, you know
somewhere in between is where most everybody else is.
And if your application is really
way more on the dinosaur side, then,
then you're the motivating purpose for this session.
And that's why we've put together a list of ten
ways for you now to modernize your application
so that you can make it, you know, really make
use of what's modern in graphic hardware.
So okay, off we go.
Number one.
This is really the most fundamental of all of the top ten.
You've heard us say this before.
If you've been to WWDC in the past, and so I
apologize for one especially repetitive item.
But it's so important that we have
to just keep emphasizing it.
And its vertex buffer projects.
And what this is is that we need for
people, well, actually I'll say it this way.
Let's look at the cause of the problem.
So one of my colleagues has a copy of the
Red Book, first edition, first printing.
I think it might be signed by Curt Ackley.
And so I looked in it and on page
six, the very first example is this.
And if you look at this example, well, this is
the, kind of the cause of our problem now a days.
It's teaching people that, you know, the easy, easy way
to get just something up and running in OpenGL is
to use immediate mode, using calls like glBegin, sending a
few vertices, glEnd, you know sending a, a color and so on.
And you know this was true back in the days when
kind of the graphics hardware was pretty power,
you know was kind of the, the most
expensive part of your machine.
The CPUs were pretty powerful and
you had a good interconnect.
But now a days, the overhead of doing
calls like this is just so inefficient.
There's much, much more modern ways.
And like if you've been following OpenGL over the years,
you know that now a days, there's four different ways
of sending vertices down to the graphics hardware.
Why are there four?
Well, because over the years there's been,
you know, this was what was fastest in 1992,
and then there was something faster in 96 and
something faster in 2000 and something faster now.
And so you know you've got to use these more modern methods.
If you're code looks like this, then you're
here, you know, you need to modernize.
And so the reason why this is such an issue is
it really has to do with the transfer bandwidth
between the host and the graphics hardware.
And if we kind of open up these diagrams, so you know
sort of stylized here on the left is the host
with your application talking to OpenGL
and the main memory is there.
You have all of your triangle data and so on sitting in
memory in immediate mode using or you know you're planning
to use immediate mode or display
list to send it to the hardware.
And then just graphically speaking on the GPU side, you have
a vertex unit, fragment unit, and you've got video memory
with you know your textures and frame buffers.
Just conceptually there.
So the problem with immediate mode is very obvious.
It's that you begin sending very, very small
chunks of data down to the graphics pipe,
they get bottlenecked in the transfer, and then meanwhile
also the vertex unit is just sitting there starving
for work to do.
Right? It's just, you know, it's such little bits of data coming
across the pipe, its able to process vertices much faster
than you know you'd be sending them one at a time.
And so that's bad.
Don't do that.
What we want you to do instead is to
set up your data into a buffer object.
That's the new box that's appeared under VRAM there.
And what you're doing is your caching your data on the GPU.
And so since its cached there, the
internal bandwidths of the GPU are immense.
And so when you go to draw this, it's a very fat pipe.
It just goes flows into the vertex processing unit
and then can go through the rest of the system.
And it's just much, much faster, much more efficient.
And then likewise just think, you know, realize that
over on the host side, basically no work is happening.
So your CPU is, is free to go do other things rather
than your CPU being busy bundling up vertices,
trying to you know bundle them up more
optimally and send them down to the GPU.
So this is kind of the basic of VBOs, vertex buffer objects.
But usual, the usual criticism that we receive at
this point is, well, Alan, my, my data is dynamic
or it's too big to fit in VRAM, what do I do?
You know I can't just push it all down
there on paging data, just whatever.
I've got some special case.
The, the answer for that is that actually you can set up
dynamic buffer objects over on the CPU side in regular RAM.
And so these are still considered, you know,
treated like vertex buffer objects in terms
of being packed together optimally and
sent down to the graphics hardware.
And actually what's nice is that it uses a DMA
transfer to kind of more optimally send them down.
So the thing to know about this is
that the worst case scenario with,
with dynamic buffer objects meaning you're changing like
every texture, or sorry, you're changing every color,
every, you know, normal, you know, every vertex, every frame.
Generally speaking, that ends up performing faster
than the equivalent in immediate mode for big datasets.
Just because the transfer is more efficient.
But okay, so now let's look at a little bit of code.
So the steps for using a vertex buffer object are here.
First, you're just defining a buffer and then creating it.
So in this case we create it with,
we're passing NULL for the data.
And this tells OpenGL that we're going to give it the data a
little bit later, that's what's going to happen in step three.
So now essentially that step two is like a big malloc.
And now we're asking for the result of the malloc back.
The MapBuffer maps the data back into our
address space and then we can insert code
to go and modify VBO data however we like.
And then when we unmap that sort of sends
it back into the storage in OpenGL.
So that's all, step one through three is the set up
and then step four here is what you
do during draw time in your draw loop.
You're just binding the buffer, or
you're setting an offset to tell OpenGL kind
of where in that buffer you want to start drawing.
Telling it what's in there and then,
boom, you go and draw those arrays.
Okay? I want to mention a brief aside.
So about this code in these slides.
So the, we're not ready to hand out slides or anything, but
if you, if we're going to go too fast for you to write it down,
my email address will be at the end of the present.
You can email me and I will reply back with
the text of the code in the slides, okay?
( Period of silence )
So that was number one.
Replace immediate mode with vertex buffer objects.
Number two.
This is a feature that we added first in,
I believe, 10.4.8.
On Intel and now in Leopard it's going to be
across all the platforms that Leopard supports.
So the idea of multithreaded engine is that,
you know, usually your application is just sort
o,f you know, your application is
running, it's talking to OpenGL.
OpenGL is taking some amount of your CPU time also.
And then OpenGL is talking to the graphics hardware.
Now the systems that we're shipping now,
you know today, are multicourse machines.
And so, in many cases, there's extra CPU
horsepower that you can offload some work to.
And so that's what the multithreaded engine is all about,
is just giving your application more time
on, you know, sort of in the main thread.
And then spawning off another thread that's going to be the
one that's doing the work to bundle up OpenGL commands
and send them down to the graphics hardware.
Now you notice there's still a
little bit of blue on CP1 there.
That's because your application is still communicating
with OpenGL and there's a little bit of overhead.
OpenGL has to take your calls and send
them over to the other thread and so on.
So that's happening.
But then CPU2 or CPU core 2 is the one
that's going to communicate with the graphics hardware.
Now the main benefit of this is that when you
issue a OpenGL call once this is turned on,
all that happens is that call gets
queued up by the other thread.
And your application thread returns
immediately and can go on to do more stuff.
And so you get a performance boost because of that.
So to turn this one, it's really just one line of code.
You have a pointer, or you have a handle to your context.
And you just call this CGLEnable to enable this.
You can also enable it from within the
OpenGL Profiler just using a checkbox.
You can force on or off.
So that's a good way to test.
But so there's a little bit of fine print here.
So with the multithreaded engine, first of all,
you know, there's a certain profile of applications
that really are going to benefit from using this.
If you are CPU bounded in your
application, then that's great.
You are farming the work that OpenGL is doing off
into another thread and that gives you more CPU time.
So that's great.
If you, but you know, cases where it
won't help you is if you have a lot
of what we call client/server sync points in OpenGL.
The number three on my list is all about that.
So we'll come back to it.
Obviously it only helps you if you have multiple CPU cores.
If you enable this on a machine with just one CPU,
and you know, and one core it just has no effect.
Also this is called the multithreaded engine,
but it doesn't change the threading behavior
in relation to OpenGL and contexts itself.
So you still, just as before, you still want
to have one rendering thread per context.
And that's basically no change.
This doesn't add anything to that.
And then I mentioned there's some tradeoffs here.
So there's you know there's additional
buffering, there's queuing that's going on.
And we have to copy the data over to the other
thread, and so there's an overhead associated there.
But the main thing with the multithreaded engine
is that you have to get rid of the sync points.
And it's just not going to do you any
good if you're using immediate mode.
So you have to move over to at least to use VBOs.
So that's number two, use the multithreaded engine.
Number three, okay, these sync
points that I'm talking about.
So the basic idea here is that you want
what the CPU is doing and what OpenGL
and the GPU are doing to be as decoupled as you possibly can.
And so you know OpenGL works in a client and server model
and there's some calls that when you make them in your app,
you know like glGett or glGetError,
and so on, well, your app,
you know, your app waits for the
OpenGL framework to reply back.
And there might be things that the OpenGL
framework has queued up that would have
to complete before it can give you that answer.
So you, in many cases, you're waiting for
the pipe to drain on the software stack.
And just blocked there waiting for an answer back.
And then that's sort of case number one.
Case number two, even worse, is that there's some calls
that have to wait for an answer back from the GPU.
Which means that you have to wait for the whole graphics
pipeline to drain before you can get your result back.
So like glReadPixels, for example, if you just call
that, that's going to, your process is going to block
until the result of the glReadPixels comes back to you.
And then it's even worse because it's blocked
and, and you know, once you start up again,
now your pipeline is dry and you
have to start filling the pipe.
You know, and the pipe is going to be frontloaded at
first, it'll take a while for things to get down.
Now getting this perfect is kind of a tough balancing act.
But there's a few steps that you can take
to really just make this better in your app.
And number one is to just methodically go through
and look for places where you call glGet.
And those other synchronizing calls.
You know, you can set break points in OpenGL Profiler,
you can use grep, whatever is your favorite method.
Just go through and every time you
find one think, do I really need this?
Like, do I really need to ask GL is lighting enabled?
And aren't I the only one who set it?
Like I could just have a Boolean that keeps track of that.
And by doing that, that's removal.
Bing, one sync point.
And so you know once you finally make
your way down to zero, you're golden.
The, another one that's really important
and especially because it's seen
in a lot of documentation, is glGetError.
So you know glGetError is great.
You can use it in your code, you know sprinkle around, do
whatever, you know, all the things that I've seen people do,
but when it comes time for production use
of your code, you need to get rid of those.
Because every one of those glGetErrors is a sync point.
And what I see a lot is people trying to debug
something will just start inserting glGetError kind
of like a print F. You know like
where is this problem coming from?
And then they leave it and you
know their performance suffers.
Number two, if you have intentional
sync points, that's bad obviously.
glFinish, you know, in the Mac OS X
is usually not a necessary call,
as compared to like on Linux or other platforms in the past,
where it's just been sort of a
standard synchronizing operation.
Instead it's best to just letCGLFlushDrawable
do a glFlush.
Now there are special cases.
So sort of if you fall into maybe the, your way more
on the, you know, the shader end of that spectrum
from the dinosaur that I was talking about.
Okay, you probably know of some cases then
where you still need to call glFlush.
But if you're a developer who's just adding a glFlush
because you think, oh, am I supposed to do this here?
No. Just you know in most cases, you
can go and take that out of your code.
A few other things just to grab bag.
You know you can avoid a lot of state setting.
And that can help you avoid sync points.
You know OpenGL is just a big state machine where
you're kind of tweaking all these knobs everywhere
and then saying, okay, you know fire me another frame.
And so the more that you can, as much as
you can minimize that, that's positive here.
And usually you do that by sorting by state.
And then something more advanced.
If you are using fences, just make sure that, that
you, you know you set the fence early and you go off
and do enough work so that the fence will have
completed or whatever you're fencing will have completed
by the time you go back and test the fence.
But okay, so that was remove client/server sync points.
The take away there, go through and get rid of glGets.
Number four, this is how you can do that.
Master the developer tools.
So in Mac OS X Leopard there's a number of developer
tools that just are the standard ones that we use
when we're trying to do performance
profiling on an OpenGL application.
You know, we usually actually start with Shark and then go
into the OpenGL Profiler and run
Driver Monitor in addition.
Also there's a tool that's coming called the Shader Builder.
And I think there's sessions here
at the show about Xray as well.
So since we start with Shark, I just
want to make a quick mention there,
I'm not going to go into Shark in too much detail.
So you know the things that you need to look
for in Shark are actually, you know, am I
spending a lot of time, you know, in disk access.
Am I spending a lot of time calling
some, you know, JPEG load library?
You know like where am I spending the time in my app?
But, if it is in OpenGL, if that's what's showing up,
then there's a few tell-tale symbols
that you need to look out for.
So glgProcessPixels.
If you're spending a lot of time in it, usually means
that you're spending, you know, you're doing texture
format conversions or image format conversions.
If you see a GLRendererFloat, it means you did
something to fall off the hardware path and now you're
in the software renderer and that's almost,
you know, if it's unintended then it's bad.
And then finally, if you see gleFinishCommandBuffer,
it means you fell into one
of these client/server sync points,
you're spending too much time there.
But okay, so for the next, I'd like to show a
quick demo of the OpenGL Profiler in Leopard.
So I've got it just running here already.
With a Quartz Composer composition.
As I mentioned, Quartz Composer
is rendering through Open L.
So it just, it makes a very convenient
test case for the Profiler.
This is the Profiler main window, up here.
I'm using, oops, let me zoom in so you can see that up here.
The place where most people start in the Profiler is,
is here to either launch an application
or to attach to a running application.
In this case, I just launched it
right before we started here.
And now there's a number of different views that you can go.
A trace, to statistics and so on.
I'm going to start with the statistics.
So this is just showing statistics of what we're
calling, they're just totaling up every frame.
And it's always interesting to kind of look at
this to see where the GL time is being spent.
But, you know, it's, there's really some
more specific things that you can do.
Now the reason why I want to show you this
is if you're developing with OpenGL
on Mac OS X, I expect you to run the Profiler.
I mean, I expect the Profiler to be
in your Dock, to tell you the truth.
And so you know, it's something that's
just very, very useful to have.
And I want to show you just a usual pattern of using it here.
So I have this statistics window up.
What I want to do actually is slow things down.
I'm going to set a break point over here.
This is the break points windows, and it's
just showing different to OpenGL calls.
And I can set a break point here
at CGLFLushDrawable, there.
And my rendering start stopped.
It shows me the stack trace here if I want to see that.
But more importantly, the statistics window stopped going.
I can clear that and now advance a frame, and
now I can see what OpenGL calls are being made
in one frame in this application.
And you know, there's some really interesting stuff in here.
In one frame, we're calling glGetError 121 times.
Okay? So that's a problem.
We're calling glGetIntegerv 544 times.
glIsEnabled, 359 times.
Y
You know in one frame.
So that's, you know that is what close
to 1000 sync points, right there.
That would be good to go and at
least justify for why they're there.
Now I happen to know, you know, since Quartz
Composer now is extensible, there are certain cases
where you know an extension could be changing
the GL state and so Quartz Composer has to go
and double check it and maybe restore it.
But that's why there's some of these.
But there's others that are maybe a little more interesting.
And so I'll show you, you know, another
thing that you can take a look at.
That's the trace window.
So clean up a little bit.
So here's the trace.
And once again, if I advance a frame, this shows me all
of the OpenGL calls that I just made in that one frame.
Right, and I can scroll through the list.
I can look at see if I, there's a button I
can check so that if I click one of these,
it'll show me the stack trace at that particular moment.
But you know, let's, I saw something
right down at the bottom here.
Now let me see, where is that?
Here's a call to glGetError.
And check it out, there's another call to glGetError.
And there's another call to glGetError.
And there's another one.
You know, like there's some things where if you go
and actually look at the trace of OpenGL calls
that you're application makes, you
might end up embarrassed, right?
Because there's things in here like, okay, you didn't realize
that your clean up function, you know, your destructor
for every class in your scene graph
hierarchy is calling glGetter.
You know, these kinds of things are
what you should be looking for.
And you know, this is the truth.
Right? And so it'll show you.
Do it in, you know, look at it in private, but...
( Laughter )
Go fix that stuff.
All right.
So thank you, we'll go back to slides.
( Period of silence )
So number four, master the developer
tools, takes us into number five.
Okay, 64-bit.
So the idea for 64-bit in OpenGL and
primarily in scientific graphics or especially
in scientific graphics is to get big address space.
You can load big datasets.
You can move the processing away from disk IO and some
of the other bottlenecks that are frequently found there
and move, you know, essentially change the
balance point again by moving to 64 bit.
So you know essentially you have the
ability to have a bigger dataset.
There's also sort of a hidden benefit and it's on Intel.
You actually have twice as many
registers as the 32-bit process.
And so that means twice as many things end
up in registers instead of on the heap.
And it's just a nice benefit you
see some performance gains there.
Now you know 64-bit just, you know, the 30-second overview.
We use the LP64 model.
That means that longs in pointers are 64-bit.
And of course, you have this huge,
you know, theoretical address space,
more than physical RAM you can put in the machine certainly.
Now between that last slide and this
one is where you ported your app.
I'm not covering that topic.
So you know, a lot of, there is some porting work
that has to happen to move your app to 64-bit.
And so this is like once you're
done, how you can make a binary.
We have a number of sessions here
at, you know, at the conference
for how to, you know, for issues in moving to 64-bit.
d
You know, my best advice to you is look at compiler warnings,
and you know, that'll tell you a
lot of what you're going to find.
But it's just a checkbox here once it's ported over.
Or if you're a command-line guy like me, then
you can use these command-line arguments here,
-arch for PowerPC 64 and for Intel 64.
Or for Xcode ability, you just add a few more
variables, or a few more items into that variable.
Okay? Something to remember as far as 64-bit goes is what's
actually been deprecated and what's not available in 64-bit.
So there's no 64-bit support fdor QuickDraw.
And so that means that some of the routines
in our AGL implementation, excuse me,
are no longer available or have replacements now.
And so you need to go and check that out.
The thing to know is that, okay, so
this is talking about 64-bit in Leopard,
and so if you have a 32-bit QuickDraw-based
application, and incidentally, that's redundant.
All of QuickDraw-based applications are 32-bit.
They will continue to work in Leopard.
Or you know, they won't break because
of this change, I should say.
All right, so that was number five, build for 64-bit.
d
For number six, I'd like to invite Geoff Stahl,
the engineering manager for the 3D graphics te=am
up to the stage and he's going to talk about adopting GLSL.
>> Thanks, Allan.
( Applause )
So I'm going to talk about adopting GLSL
and go through a little bit today.
And then tomorrow in the morning we're going to
talk more in depth about GLSL in general.
So first thing I want to talk about is what is GLSL?
If you haven't used it before, it's a high-
level C-like language which really kind
of simplifies the programming of OpenGL.
It allows you to directly program what you want to program
rather than setting maybe your color mask or your colors
and try and draw it all with vertices and fragments.
It really allows you to actually define
a program that defines your vertices,
define a program that defines your fragments.
And now it will allow you to define
a program that defines geometry also.
So it's a rendering in the OpenGL API.
One of the keys here is that it allows
future access to the power of the GPU.
Right now if you take Ope GL 1112 even through 15,
there are features that are being built
into GPUs you just can't get access to.
Geometry shader, brand new, fourth
generation shading extensions.
Not available through any non -programmable API.
So if you're not on a programmable API,
you can't get access to those features.
An example at the bottom of the
slide is what it kind of looks like.
You got some vertex attributes coming in,
uniforms are like constants to your program.
And the variance in this case a vertex shader is something
you're outputting to the fragment into the pipeline.
It's a main like you would expect in C, and basically,
in this case we're going to do some work with the vertices,
set a texture coordinate, and output your GL position and
then will go to be interpolated for your fragment programs.
So why do you want to adopt GLSL?
A lot of folks that Allan may have talked to in the
beginning of the session have like the dinosaur kind of app.
What benefit is GLSL in your dinosaur?
The thing here is I think it opens up a really
large set of new types of apps and new types
of kind of programming designs for OpenGL.
Because this really is approachable.
It's C-like language.
You can just kind of type what you
want like I showed in the example.
And you don't really have to think of how can
take a, you know, use a texture combine stages
and combine different texture, you know,
different texturing to get the effect that I want?
You actually can just blend them
in a small program that you write.
It's also easy to experiment with.
We give you some tools, we give you Shader
Builder which we're rewriting for Leopard.
We also have the Profiler works that's hooked in, and
we have an Editor sample out there which you can use,
and it allows you to very easily just on the fly
write shaders, experiment with how they fit together,
and look at the output in a quick-turn kind of
iterative development environment which may not be
if you're setting a lot of state and trying
to figure out kind of where you went awry,
it may not be as easy to do.
It's also, as I said before, you get
direct access to the graphics hardware.
Vertex shaders, fragment shaders, geometry shaders,
those all allow you direct access to the newest features
of graphics hardware, and we'll continue
to really focus our effort there.
And it's fast.
You can directly access the power of the GPU.
I'm going to show a few demos, and one of the keys
to programming modern GPUs is understanding kind
of what Allan was talking about with where your dataflow is.
Are you taking vertices from the CPU
moving them across a very small bus one
at a time to the GPU and starving it for data?
Or are you statically putting your vertices and
your geometry on the GPU and allowing the GPU
to run full open and run all those effects?
You want to really minimize those synchronization points.
You want to maximize the amount of things a GPU can do
on its own without having to come back to your program,
and a lot of the topics we're talking
about today really are down that road.
And the GLSL allows you to put programs on the GPU
that run natively on the GPU and stay there, and that's
where it gets data from and executes data.
And also really from an industry standpoint with the
ARB and from the Apple, that's our focus moving forward.
Our focus is going to be GLSL modernized in the
OpenGL API for using programmable hardware.
So one thing I want to show here is talk
about the fourth generation shader support.
So there's been some questions. We just brought out
a new laptop with the Invidia 8600 MGT, part energy force,
G Force 8600 part, and it is a fourth
generation capable shader for Leopard.
We're going to have geometry shaders,
GPU shader for transformed feedback
and bindable uniform extensions, all part of the
new modern fourth generation shading extension.
And what those things are, geometry shaders allow you to
manipulate geometry downstream of the vertex process.
And so you have a set a vertices maybe that form a triangle.
Well, that triangle goes into a geometry
shader and you can do things with it.
GPU shader allows you to use large
texture arrays, integer texture arrays.
Transform feedback allows that bottom feedback loop that you
may see which allows you to go out from a geometry shader
back into your inputs and do an iterative on the GPU.
Again, you're not synchronizing across the
bus, you're not reading it back to the CPU,
iterative work on the GPU with
using the full power of the GPU.
And finally bindable uniforms allow you to take these large
constant set, bundle them up in packages and submit them
to a large number of shaders at one time.
So for GLSL we're going to talk more in depth tomorrow morning,
but right now I'm just going to go over, do a little demo.
Show you some of the things we can do with
these new fourth generation shading extensions.
( Period of silence )
Okay, this is very much like dinosaurs.
This is, the only thing interesting here is
that this is running through a geometry shader.
And when we move to the next version you'll see
that what we have here is exactly what you saw
on the last one, but all this is occurring on the GPU.
It's not very interesting in a small shader like
this, but all we sent was the original geometry down,
all the original vertices, and we then sent a single uniform
at that point to manipulate over time where the inset
and outset of the new geometry we're
actually coming out of the geometry shader.
Again, not, not too bad, but we can do better.
Let's see, let's move up a little bit in the idea here.
Red dots, ten control points.
These lines are all draw with 10 control points.
I didn't send down line segments, I didn't
send down any kind of additional pieces.
I sent down 10 points to the GPU.
What we can do is we can-- you'll see that's
really the geometry that you would get
if you wanted to draw just a line between them.
Geometry shaders allow you to get line adjacency.
They allow you to figure out and kind
of trace along your path so to speak.
So you can add in iterations and you can add in smoothing.
So you have a-- you can add in a very smooth curve,
and you can, of course, manipulate it in real time,
again all the program here is doing
is sending down 10 control points.
Control points are bouncing off the edges and the
rest of the geometry is rendered all in the GPU.
This is simple for a demo, but obviously
you can expand that and you can see
if you have very powerful GPUs
you can leave the geometry there.
( Period of silence )
This is a fairly simple demo as far as-- this
may be what you, what you'd like to have to see
if you're having a standard teapot
drawing in your apps that need teapots.
But really here, we have a fairly high
tessellation and it looks pretty good.
Both of them, both versions on the left without a geometry
shader and on the right using quadratic normal interpolation
with the geometry shader where it takes all of the, all
of the information in from each quad, they're equivalent.
But if I lower my tessellation on this and
you can see it's not very many polygons now.
That you can see, the highlight stays as a nice
highlight, and so you can get better highlights,
better geometry information using that geometry
shader because it can look at adjacent points
and pull out that geometry information, allow you
to do things you couldn't do with high tessellation.
So instead you would have to send a lot of data down.
And you can see from the wire frame,
I don't have wire frame for that one.
So moving up again, this is kind of a standard bump map
demo, and like okay, why are we showing bump map demos?
That's not very interesting.
That's like so 1982 or 1992 or 2002.
What's interesting on this is that the geometry is static.
It's all sent down and the vertex program
interpolates with the time value, so one uniform.
Keyframes between them, so it interpolates between them.
The light vector is sent when the light vector changes.
The rest is done on the GPU.
So the GPU takes the light vector in and does
all of the bump mapping actually on the hardware.
There's no additional light vectors down.
You don't have to go per poly, per polygon or
per vertex and send additional information.
So all of the bump mapping is down completely
on the GPU and the CPU is completely idle other
than sending one time value and one light vector.
( Period of silence )
And of course, you'd always want to
add shadows to it, so in this case,
this is using a geometry shader to generate lines.
We don't draw any of the original data.
All we're going to do is look at silhouette edges.
We're going to use GPU shader, calculate the silhouette
edges and draw lines instead of the original data.
So GPU shader processing geometry information on the GPU.
( Period of silence )
Taking that to another step, in this case,
we have-- we're going to draw shadow volumes.
This is kind of a visualization of actually what
you would see if you extended shadow volumes.
In this case, I will show the wire frame, the wire frame you
can see the lines that were generating by the GPU shader.
Again, additional lines generated.
And if we fill them in and draw them as filled surfaces,
you can see the shadow volumes from the light source.
Finally let's put this together and get
a, are lit, bump mapped Quake 2 model,
but the key here is, again, one light source, one time value.
The rest of it's all in GPU.
So this is what geometry shader adds.
It adds you to do the ability of actually understanding
the geometry sent down, generating geometry
and allowing you to do these things on the GPU.
Alleviating the CPU of that, alleviating
the busses of bottleneck,
allows you to do some great things
using this new technology.
And this is going to be available in Leopard.
( Period of silence )
I'll hand it back over to Allan.
Thank you.
( Applause )
Thanks.
>> Thanks, sir.
>> Matching shirts.
Thank you, Geoff.
So we'll continue on with our top ten list.
That was adopting GLSL, certainly something
that we want you all to look into some more.
And just a reminder.
So Geoff's session on GLSL is 9:00am tomorrow.
Come early, get up early, have that morning coffee.
Number seven, use APPLE_flush_buffer_range.
It's an extension that we've added.
And this has to do with vertex buffer
objects and how to make updates to them.
So going back to our chart, our diagram again.
So the issue with vertex buffer objects is that when
you do what I said before and you just call map,
what that does is to just calls, sorry, it
copies the data of those objects into your--
or it maps it into your local address space.
And then if you go and make some modification to one of
those objects, when you call unmap what's going to happen is
that the entire object is going to get copied back to the GPU.
And that's inefficient.
If you have some really big object, you're just
changing one byte, it's going to copy the whole thing back.
So instead what flush_buffer_range lets you
do is to just, come on baby, there we go.
All right.
Well, it didn't quite show it.
What flush_buffer_range lets you do
is if you make a change to an object,
you can say, okay, just copy back the part that I changed.
And so that way you're being much more efficient.
If you make multiple changes, you're able
to, you know, say exactly where they are
and only those parts gets, get copied back.
And so you end with a much more efficient
transfer here for when you're modifying the data.
So the steps here are really pretty easy.
The first is just you essentially start by turning off the
default behavior which is to flush the whole thing back.
And then proceed normally.
You map the buffer, that copies the buffer into
your, the buffer into your local address space.
You make some changes to modify it and now you can
go and say explicitly exactly what parts you changed.
You tell us the offset and the number of bytes.
And if you make multiple changes in different
locations, you just call this with different offsets
and bytes, you know call it multiple times.
And so now when you call unmap buffer, that's you know only
that part is going to get mapped back into the original VBO.
So that's number seven, use Apple_flush_buffer_range
to modify your VBOs.
So if you're modifying VBOs, this is critical.
This is one of those modernization steps that
is going to give you a good performance boost.
Okay, number eight.
Going onwards.
Another buffer object type.
So frame buffer objects.
These basically replace code that
used to be dealing with PBuffers.
And a lot of this is, a lot of
the purpose of using PBuffers
in the past has been for doing multiple, multipass effects.
Essentially like our render to texture and then
using the texture in a, in another part of the frame.
The benefit of frame buffer objects
though is that they don't have to be,
well, you don't have to switch context
like you do with a PBuffer.
And so, you know, that ends up giving you a nice performance
boost there and avoiding a sync point in many cases.
So then there's a more advanced use, that
combinations of frame buffer objects along
with the other buffer objects can be
used to do a render to vertex array.
We're not going to show that this year.
Go look at last year's video if
you want to see an example of that.
But so just talking about render to texture.
You know, the basic steps here are, there's two steps.
You know, in the first step we're going to take our normal
geometry, we're going to render it normally using OpenGL.
But instead of rendering into the frame buffer
we're going to render into a frame buffer object.
And you get that result sitting there,
and it's basically now just a texture.
And you can use that texture in the second pass and
put it on some arbitrary geometry, of course, a teapot.
And render that normally into the normal frame
buffer and you end up, you know, with that result.
So that's just, that's the basic
concept of a render to texture.
So to use frame buffer objects here, here are the steps.
The first is to bind the frame
buffer and then attach a texture ID
that is going to be the destination
or, you know, the output of that.
You check to make sure that everything is complete.
And then you can do whatever normal
OpenGL operations you want.
And those are going to end up instead of in the regular
frame buffer, they're going to end up in that texture.
Now you're done, and so you bind, you put everything
back to normal, bind to the default frame buffer.
And now you can go and do a second pass
using that texture ID that you generated,
or the texture that you generated the first time around.
So that is number eight.
Replace. Replace uses of PBuffers or render to
texture with frame buffer objects instead.
Number nine, pixel buffer objects.
Seems like it's the same thing.
Wasn't I just talking about PBuffers, pixels?
No, this is a different feature.
It's a part of the OpenGL 2.1 specification
now which we're supporting in Mac OS X Leopard.
The main value here is to, for really fast copies of pixel
data between the different buffer objects without having
to come back to the GPU to do like a read
back and then send it back down again.
The main purpose that we see a
lot of-- or we expect you to use this
for is this actually could be a faster
way for you guys to do glReadPixels.
There's also a number of different things that are more
advanced, render-to-vertex arrays, streaming, and so on.
But asynchronous glReadPixels is something that could
give you a big benefit, because as I mentioned before,
ReadPixels is one of those really,
really heavy-weight sync points.
And so, you know, usually you might have
code that looks kind of like this, right?
You have glReadPixels, you're passing in a particular
format and you're getting back some result, right?
So the idea here, you probably have something like this
in your code, just you know with other stuff around it.
Well, here's what I want you to surround this call with.
You want to augment it now with a call to, or with PBOs.
So the first is to just bind the PBO as the new destination
for where you're glReadPixels is going to end up.
So you notice instead of result
now on number two we have offset.
So that's just you know an offset into the PBO.
We make the glReadPixels call as
before, but now you're asynchronous.
It's decoupled.
And so you don't want for it to complete.
You go off and you do other work.
Go do something, have you know a cup of
coffee when you're out of that teapot.
And so, just kidding, but you know go do some other work.
And then insert enough time essentially so that
when you come back and you call map buffer,
the glReadPixels will have completed in that time.
And it's, it's asynchronous.
So if it's completed, you'll get
the pointer back immediately.
If it hasn't completed yet, this
will block until it's complete.
Okay? And then when you call unmap buffer...
Oh, and then unmap the buffer to, to clean up.
Okay, so actually I want to bring Geoff back up.
We have a really interesting demo that's using
these techniques for read back and so on.
So Geoff.
>> Thanks.
So thanks, Allan.
( Applause )
So we're going to show, we're going to talk to the same,
basically the same demo we did on Monday afternoon
but we're going to talk about the techniques behind it.
Blizzard has done a great job of using PBO
and using some techniques here to get a,
really an interesting user enhancement in World of Warcraft.
So let me jump right into the demo, and
we'll talk through what they're doing.
They've allowed us to kind of glimpse into their app a bit.
So as far as you know kind of how this works.
So we talked about before is that in the next
major release of World of Warcraft for Mac OS X,
you'll be able to capture movies in real time and compress
them on the fly for documenting your greatest heroics.
And so what we're going to do is we're
going to do that and then talk
about exactly how Blizzard kind of
implemented this behind the scenes.
And so you can do something in your app the same way.
I think there's a big community now of, of capturing you
know either, whether it's a scientific visualization app,
whether it's a game, whether it's movie playback, it,
you'll want to get this data back off the
GPU and this is a great way to do it
So we're here, I'm running again on my laptop.
It doesn't require the highest end hardware.
It is, you know, depending on the amount of
hard drive space you have and the amount
of how fast your hard drive does
depend on how fast you can stream.
But this is a, this is a current laptop and we have
all of the visual options turned on to maximum.
So everything is turned up there.
And let's look again at the Mac options.
In this case, I'm going to capture 800 by 600, a
little bit smaller than I did on the Mac Pro,
but it's 20 frames per second, and then I'm going to
use H264 so we can use it, iPods, Apple TVs,
iPhones, websites, whatever you want to do here.
And we just jump right in and talk about the,
actually I'm going to show the demo of the video capture.
And again, the big thing is here that I can
start the capture and we have an icon that came
up in the upper corner here that
shows it, the movie capture is going.
But you know, it's, you know, you have
a good play-- everything looks nice.
It plays well and there's no problems with, with
playing the game while you're doing video capture.
And one thing, I'll jump in on, I'm probably going to get
this wrong, but Rob can correct me later if I'm, if I do.
I'm going to do the capture, I'm going to start
compression now because this is a little demo.
Your, if you go into the movie control
panel it's also just limited by hard drive space.
Because basically, from a technique standpoint,
what have they done so far?
So they took the frame, and they've rendered it
into basically a texture, rendered it onto the GPU.
So we kept, we did that work on the GPU.
Also they rerendered to a 12-bit YUV buffer on
the GPU to get the data as small as possible.
So we're dealing with the smallest piece of data.
They then use the technique that Allan described to map
this as a PBO and use glReadPixels to pull it back.
And when they pulled it back, they try and they do that
on, they do that and it gets back into the system memory.
One thing is here is there's a synchronization on this.
So if you only have one buffer and you're trying
to read that back for the next frame needs a buffer
and you're kind of, so they set up a round robin.
So they have three buffers in flight.
And they always try and keep you know the, they try and as
Rob describes when he's talking about it, is it's a juggler.
You always try and keep some things in flight.
You're only working to draw one
and receive one at the same time.
And you have to experiment in your app depending on how big
your frames are, how much bandwidth you're using that kind
of thing to determine what the
right asynchronicity is there.
But again, the theme of the talk is about asynchronicity.
So we have this asynchronous mapping of,
or asynchronous use of these buffers.
And it allows the game to continue playing while you're
doing the capture and not really affect the game play.
Because it keeps it on the GPU.
Finally the compressing sequence uses QuickTime,
spawns a thread, asynchronous again,
reads the frames in 12-bit YUV off disk, because
it's a custom fragment program to write that.
So we compress small, small amounts of data.
It then does the compression on the fly with QuickTime.
They've talked about trying to do the compression
in real time because you can imagine if you could do
that basically you're limited by compressed
space rather than uncompressed frames.
And that just depends on synchronization.
If you had an eight core machine or a four core
machine, you probably could get away with it.
But for the majority of the users of World of Warcraft
and your laptop, you know, you only have a couple cores.
Maybe a couple years from now.
But so, you're back at the, back at the
old ranch and you want to show your movies.
And so we'll go back to here and show the movie.
And again it's, it was 800 by 600 of it.
Oops.
( Period of silence )
And we should have the standard,
you know, standard movie scrub.
And it just plays like you would expect.
( Period of silence )
So you get, you know, a movie of your
travels, captures your stuff, and you can post it
to the web, do whatever you'd like with it.
Again, again as I mentioned before,
Monday, it's a great synergy of technologies,
has a lot of things that can tie together.
But the key here is some components from Allan's talk.
Remove sync points, use asynchronous
PBO API, use multicore.
Another point is a big point is the multithreaded engine.
Multithreaded engine really makes this work a lot better
because really you have these sets of the ReadPixels
in the command queue for the multithreaded engine.
They're not necessarily being executed by the engine.
So they can be queued up also.
So you can get that additional asynchronicity.
Multithreaded engine, key component here.
So now we've hit, you know, maybe four or five of your,
of your top ten in implementing a feature like this.
So I think everyone can go find a place in
their app they can use some of these techniques.
And I'll hand it back over to Allan.
>> Great, thanks, Geoff.
( Applause )
So thank you, Geoff.
So that was the end of number nine.
Move pixels with PBOs to make them asynchronous.
That takes us to our last one, number ten.
It's embrace the platform.
So you know a lot of the OpenGL applications I look
at are trying to do cross-platform stuff and that means
that when they run on Mac OS X they
look not like a Mac OS X application.
And so, you know, there's some things that I want to
really, you know, my title is evangelist, so here we go.
I would really like to, to encourage you guys to think of
places in your application especially if it's cross platform
or you're bringing it to Mac OS X, where you would use some
of the frameworks that we provide for you rather than kind
of rolling your own or doing, you know, one of
these cross-platform GUI tool kits and so on.
So you know, first of all, we want
to encourage you to use Cocoa.
So use and NSOpenGLView to render your OpenGL.
And there's a very cool thing that's
now a tie in, related to Core Animation.
You know a lot of apps that I've looked at over the years
that are trying to like put text or a HUD or something
up on the screen and they're doing it by rendering, you
know, the letters themselves in like Battle Zone Letter Art.
You know it doesn't look right.
And now, you know, with Core Animation, you can render
OpenGL into an OpenGL layer and you can have Cocoa controls
in another layer right on top it, composited.
Don't have to do anything.
You can write those Cocoa controls in Interface Builder.
You know, it's just-- it's a very seamless
experience for you to go and use.
So the other thing is, you know, in my job
I see a lot of different applications
as people are bringing them to the platform.
And I, I mean we love to get, or you
know, to see applications coming.
But once, once you've reached
the platform to really modernize,
you should and give your application
a Mac OS X user experience.
And what this really means it that if you're using
X11 of GLX or GLUT, or you know, one of these sort
of, you know, dinosaur windowing models, you
could move to what is native on Mac OS X
and give your application a much more, a much
better user experience and more of a Mac OS X look.
And then also other things.
If your application goes beyond 3D,
think abou=t some of the things
that you could do with some of our other Cocoa-based UIs.
So I mentioned Core Animation.
So you know, Core Animation isn't just about
having, you know, kind of an interesting demo.
It can really be something that does
something new in your user interface.
And particularly I want you to look at it
as a way to layer controls into OpenGL.
And we're kind of jettisoning some of that
old code for doing really weird text
and stuff on top of the OpenGL rendering.
If you're doing image processing in your app,
then you probably already know about Core Image,
because that would be kind of your bread and butter.
But maybe you're, you just want to do something
like add a, add a transition or add a bloom effect
or add some other kind of imaging
effect into your application.
That's something that you could think about implementing
through Core Image in the Mac OS X version of your app.
If you're bringing video into your app,
maybe you're playing video on a texture.
The way to do that the right way
on Mac OS X is through Core Video.
And you can, if you're bringing it in, you can
then pipe that through Core Image on its way
to apply image processing effects to every frame in
the video and then it ends up in the texture and OpenGL
and you can use it in all the normal ways.
And if you're using, if you need to do movie playback
and capture, I want to encourage you to look at QTKit.
Now there's a QTKit session, Core Image session,
Core Animation sessions here at the show.
So for more information on those, go to those sessions.
But really embrace the platform.
You know I would love to see more like
hardcore OpenGL applications going
into the best Mac OS X user experience category
at the ADA.
That's what I want to challenge you with.
So that was number ten, embrace the
platform, which concludes our top ten list.
For more information, something I want to
point out for those here is that we're going
to be issuing an OpenGL seed before Leopard ships.
And so if you're interesting in getting into the
OpenGL seeding program, send email to that address.
Secondly, we have a public mailing
list for discussions of OpenGL.
I want to remind you that what we discuss
here at the conference is confidential.
But for, you know, you want to get on that list
just to kind of find out what's going on.
And then you can find documentation
and that's my email address there.
A few other things just before we wrap up.
So these are the other OpenGL
sessions that are going to be happening.
And so sort of depending on where you fit in, if you're
more advanced, you want to go to the GLSL and Tuning.
If you're coming from another platform,
you probably want to go to switching.
Everybody should come to the lab.